Adding deprecated bundles enhancement (#38)
operator-framework/enhancements: enhancements/deprecated-bundles.md

  - "@kevinrizza"
approvers:
  - "@ecordell"
  - "@shawn-hurley"
  - "@kevinrizza"
creation-date: 2020-07-15
last-updated: 2020-07-15
status: implementable
---

# Deprecating Bundles

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined

## Summary

OPM will support marking versions as deprecated, truncating the update graph of a given package, and appending to the tail of channel. Deprecated versions will not be installable. If a deprecated version is installed prior to upgrade appropriate alerts will be fired on cluster. 

## Motivation

The default set of Operators provided on OCP clusters will soon (4.6+) be delivered through indexes and each OCP minor version will have a unique set of index images. Today, packages in one index will be duplicated to the next minor version index when it is available. This means operator owners releasing through the redhat, certified, or community pipelines will now need a way to specify which versions of their operator are incompatible or unsupported in the next minor version index.

### Terminology

#### Deprecated bundle

> A deprecated bundle is an upgradable but uninstallable bundle in the update graph of an operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A deprecated bundle is an upgradable but not installable bundle in the update graph of an operator.
```

`uninstallable` tends to mean something else.

#### Terminated bundle

A terminated bundle is neither upgradable nor installable.

### Goals

> - A deprecated bundle in the update graph and any of its replacements (terminated bundles) will not be installed by OLM

Reviewer: by "any of its replacements" do you mean "any of the versions it replaces"?

And this seems to imply that any version older than the deprecated version is implicitly considered `terminated` but it's not clear to me why that should be the case.  Can't both 1.2 and 1.3 of my operator be deprecated?

Reviewer 2: If we say 1.2 is replaced by 1.3 in channel X and we deprecate 1.3, you would never be able to visit 1.3 from that channel.

Reviewer 2: Offline:

Ben and I discussed this more. We need to make it more clear what happens based on some different channel upgrades. We also need to make it more clear how someone who is stranded (in the case above on 1.2) and now has no upgrade path how then can get out of that situation. 

My Opinion is that they can use a custom catalog to pull the old catalog and update it to a version that can be updated from, then switch back to the default catalog.

I imagine that we want to discuss this UX and the trade-offs.

Reviewer 3: There's two cases in the "I'm on a not latest version and I'm going to be stranded" problem:

1. I'm on a version that actually needs to be stepped through before I can get to a supported version of my cluster upgrade.

In that case, you may actually need to do the upgrade to your operator before you execute the cluster upgrade.

2. I'm on a version that says it can't update directly to a supported version on the new cluster, but that's not really true.

In that case, either the package developer needs a way to update the graph to say "oh, you're actually good" OR the user just needs a way to force the upgrade anyway.

IMO we would eventually want a way to alert a user doing an upgrade that says "hey, you're going to be stranded, go do this update first" because of problem 1. For problem 2, that seems to be solved by giving package developers a way to overlay a new graph onto the index to allow that upgrade edge.

In either case though, I think we have some workarounds, so we can explore how to solve these problems more generally in the future.

Reviewer 4: I too was confused that marking a version as deprecated implicitly marks all the versions it replaces as terminated. Just reading the enhancement, without this comment thread, I would have still been confused how a version ends up in the terminated state.

Reviewer 4: Let's say I have OpenShift Serverless 1.7.0, 1.7.1, and 1.7.2 that are supported in OCP 4.5. They're also supported in OCP 4.6. Then, in OCP 4.7, I want to deprecate the Serverless 1.7.x versions. If I just mark the latest 1.7.x release as deprecated, anyone on a previous z-stream of 1.7 will now be terminated, not given an option to upgrade, and also not given an alert that they're on a deprecated version?

The realistic scenario I see is marking an entire major.minor version as deprecated instead of individual major.minor.patch versions. Is there a way to do that in this proposal? Or am I only marking a specific major.minor.patch version as deprecated and anyone not on exactly that patch version won't see a deprecation alert?

Reviewer: @bbrowning keep in mind you're making it deprecated for a particular index image/ocp version.

So marking your 1.7.latest deprecated (thus terminating any old 1.7.x) will only impact consumers of the 4.7 index image.  Someone on ocp 4.6, using the 4.6 index image, could still upgrade to whatever 1.7.x versions were allowed previously (assuming you are distributing those in the 4.6 index image).

My expectation would be if you're making 1.7.latest as deprecated, that's because you expect people to move to 1.8.x, and that 1.8.x is available in the 4.7 index image.

So to play out the scenarios:

customer on 4.6:  they are not affected since you didn't impact the 4.6 index image.  They can upgrade to 1.7.latest.
customer on 4.7: they should already by on the 1.8.x version(emphasis on should be, but there no way to enforce that they are and they may have had to take explicit channel switching action to get to 1.8.x), but if they were not then yes, you've effectively stranded them at whatever 1.7.x version they were at, they have no way to upgrade to 1.7.latest or 1.8.x.

(i'm not clear on exactly how you specify that the deprecation only applies to a particular index image and not another one, i'll let @shawn-hurley explain how you actually define it)

Reviewer 2: Discussed with Ben offline the outcomes were:

1. Whatever calls this deprecation needs to keep in mind that for the thing that is deprecated when it has new releases for the patch stream on the N version (previous ocp release) the N+1 needs to get the updated deprecation @htwaugh (this is not just before the release).

2. That we keep the UX of using the pipeline simple, so that user can declare the intent, and the pipeline can do the correct things to keep the index database up to date and correct.

Reviewer 5: For (1), that's something the opm-wrapper we discussed would need to be aware of, right?

- Operator Owners don’t need to release a new version in order to specify which bundle is deprecated
- The index add command is enhanced to un-do this termination if needed
- The deprecation is specified after promotion (not during) and before publishing of the index image
- Alerts are fired on cluster when a deprecated version is installed

### Non-Goals

- OLM supports upgrading from a terminated bundle
- Alerts are fired if terminated bundles exist on cluster
- OLM prevents cluster upgrades based on whether versions are terminated in the upgraded cluster’s index

## Proposal

> We propose to add a command to `opm index` called `deprecate` which takes in a set of bundle images, an index, and all the same arguments as `opm index add`. The command modifies the index by removing all versions that come after the specified bundle image in the update graph. In this way, versions that were removed from the index will not receive updates if subscriptions still exist for them on cluster. A new field is added to the operator-registry database table `operatorbundle` called `deprecated` and the bundle images specified in the command will be marked as such.

Reviewer: removing all the versions that come *after* the specified bundle image?

this is probably a case of the implementation leaking into the proposal description, but mentally/logically i would think you'd be removing the versions that came *before* the deprecated one, assuming you remove anything at all.  E.g. if i deprecate 1.3, and 1.3 replaces 1.2, then 1.2 would be removed entirely(terminated).

but this still seems concerning that it's stranding users who might have been on 1.2 prior to the upgrade?  (1.2 was not terminated or deprecated at the time they upgraded, and now they are stranded at 1.2 because 1.3 is deprecated and will not upgrade from 1.2?)

Author: The choice of wording isn't great here - my bad. I think we're on the same page in that I meant to say anything from the deprecated version to the tail of the channel should be removed.

Stranding users is a good point although I'm not sure this isn't the operator owner's responsibility to communicate this effectively.

> The operator-registry APIs will be modified to ensure that OLM does not allow install of deprecated bundles. This also means appropriate status reporting in the subscription and installplan need to be added to OLM, and alerts will be fired if a deprecated version is installed.

Reviewer 6: Since this targets 4.6, OLM will query for bundles directly and resolve them with the new resolver. 

That means that we probably want a new `property` type, like `olm.deprecated`/`olm.obsolete`/`olm.not-installble`, and then in the resolver we would filter out any options that have this property set.

```

we then deprecate version 1.3.0 using the following command

```
    $ opm index deprecate --bundles "quay.io/my/bundle:1.3.0" --from-index "quay.io/my/index:v4.6" --tag "quay.io/my/index:v4.7"
```

Now, in `quay.io/my/index:v4.7` the above channel looks like:

```
    1.4.0 -- replaces -> 1.3.0 [deprecated]
```

Deprecated versions are upgradable but not installable. To achieve this, we will modify the operator-registry apis used by OLM to determine what can be installed.

#### Story 2

As an index maintainer I want to be able to undo the above operation ideally without removing the entire package and re-adding all the bundles.

##### Implementation Details

The `opm index rm` command is modified to allow removal of the tail a channel (deprecated versions will always lie at the tail of the graph).

The `opm index add` command is modified to allow adding to the tail of a channel (removed versions from the deprecate command will always have been from the tail)

With these two additions we can now undo the above deprecation by:

- removing 1.3.0 (this is mainly to remove the deprecation notice)
- adding 1.3.0, 1.2.0, 1.1.0

#### Story 3

> As a cluster admin, I want to be alerted if subscriptions exist on cluster for deprecated versions of operators.

Reviewer 6: Isn't this called out as a non-goal

Author: the non-goal is for terminated bundles

Reviewer 2: I think the alert should be for:

1. "Subscription is to a channel that no longer exists, or the head is deprecated"
2. "A Manual subscription is on a deprecated version"
3. "Stranded version is installed" we need to document how to get out of this situation by installing the older catalog

Also with the new work on the skip range being steppable, I imagine that this will be less likely to happen.

- Operator Owners don’t need to release a new version in order to specify which bundle is deprecated
- Index maintainers have a way to un-do deprecation if needed
- The deprecation is specified after promotion (not during) and before publishing of the index image
- Alerts are fired on cluster when a deprecated version is installed

### Non-Goals

- OLM supports upgrading from a terminated bundle
- Alerts are fired if terminated bundles exist on cluster
- OLM prevents cluster upgrades based on whether versions are terminated in the upgraded cluster’s index

## Proposal

We propose to add a command to `opm index` called `deprecate` which takes in a set of bundle images, an index, and all the same arguments as `opm index add`. The command modifies the index by removing all versions that come before the specified bundle image in the update graph (that is, until the tail of each channel). If this operation removes the head of a channel, then the channel is removed. The removal of bundles from the update graph will not modify the update graph after the deprecated version (from the deprecated channel to the head of the channel).

> Versions that were removed from the index will not receive updates if subscriptions still exist for them on cluster. Ideally, appropriate communication from the operator maintainer will mean that cluster admins will upgrade to the latest supported version prior to cluster upgrade. In the event that the cluster is upgraded and `Subscriptions` to terminated bundles exist on cluster, the cluster admin can manually trigger an upgrade by either:

Reviewer 4: In my experience, the upgrade process seems to happen in the reverse. Cluster admins first upgrade the OCP version and then sometimes remember to update the operator version/channel to match. How would an operator maintainer communicate with a cluster admin that they need to update an operator before updating a cluster? If the cluster is updated first, the operator can detect the newer OCP version and fire an alert to let the admin know they should upgrade before the older operator version gets marked as deprecated. You can't do the reverse - an alert that says, "If you choose to upgrade to OCP 4.x you'll need to update this operator first" is just noise as you have no idea if or when the cluster admin would choose to do that upgrade.

Author: I completely agree. The communication I am expecting from operator maintainer to cluster admin is, so far, just in the form of documentation for supporting manual subscriptions. I guess the way this is phrased makes it seem like the latter workflow is less likely so I can re-phrase that.

Reviewer 2: Offline we discussed:

1. An RFE, by which a user could have OLM do the alerting based on a channel
2. An operator marked for deprecation at a particular version can start to fire alerts. This is has a drawback where if a user does not upgrade to that particular version, then you don't get the alerts.

- Alerts are fired if terminated bundles exist on cluster
- OLM prevents cluster upgrades based on whether versions are terminated in the upgraded cluster’s index

## Proposal

We propose to add a command to `opm index` called `deprecate` which takes in a set of bundle images, an index, and all the same arguments as `opm index add`. The command modifies the index by removing all versions that come before the specified bundle image in the update graph (that is, until the tail of each channel). If this operation removes the head of a channel, then the channel is removed. The removal of bundles from the update graph will not modify the update graph after the deprecated version (from the deprecated channel to the head of the channel).

Versions that were removed from the index will not receive updates if subscriptions still exist for them on cluster. Ideally, appropriate communication from the operator maintainer will mean that cluster admins will upgrade to the latest supported version prior to cluster upgrade. In the event that the cluster is upgraded and `Subscriptions` to terminated bundles exist on cluster, the cluster admin can manually trigger an upgrade by either.

> - editing the `Subscription`'s `startingCSV` field (and/or `channel` field if the channel was removed) to point to an available / installable `csv`

Reviewer 2: @bparees This is the section that follows up on the conversation we had offline. 

Two Questions:
1. Is this more clear what happens when a subscription is stranded? 
2. Does this UX work, or do you have reservations about it?

The alternative is that we attempt to also keep every node and some as not installable. I think that over time this becomes unwieldy and we will want to have this mechanism anyway?

Reviewer 2: /cc @ecordell @kevinrizza

Reviewer 2: After re-reading this, we need to remove the `staringCSV` field update causing an upgrade. We should instead make it `source` field update or `channel` update because we will need to change the source to the custom catalog.

- creating a custom `CatalogSource` pointing to the previous OCP index, editing the `Subscription` to point to the new `CatalogSource` and, in the case where the channel was removed, editing the `channel` field of the `Subscription`.

With the new work on the skip range being steppable, the above scenario may be less likely to happen.

A new field will be added to the operator-registry database table `operatorbundle` called `deprecated` and the bundle images specified in the command will be marked as such.

> The OLM resolver will be modified with a new property type, (like `olm.deprecated`/`olm.obsolete`/`olm.not-installable`) in order to filter out any options that have this property set and disallow installs of deprecated bundles. This also means appropriate status reporting in the subscription and installplan need to be added to OLM, and alerts will be fired if a deprecated version is installed.

Reviewer 2: let's define which here:

my vote is olm.deprecated to match with all the other names we are using for this command

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As an index maintainer I want to be able to truncate update graphs in order to remove or prevent installs of incompatible or unsupported versions of certain operators.

##### Implementation Details

> A new field is added to the operator-registry database table `operatorbundle` called `deprecated` and the bundle images specified in the command will be marked as such. Versions that come after the deprecated version in the update graph (in all channels) are removed from the database.

Reviewer 5: That come after, tailwards? Meaning, those versions which would get replaced by the deprecated version?

Author: yes - I'll make that more clear

For example, suppose following channel:

```
    1.4.0 -- replaces -> 1.3.0 -- replaces -> 1.2.0 -- replaces -> 1.1.0
```

we then deprecate version 1.3.0 using the following command

```
    $ opm index deprecate --bundles "quay.io/my/bundle:1.3.0" --from-index "quay.io/my/index:v4.6" --tag "quay.io/my/index:v4.7"
```

Now, in `quay.io/my/index:v4.7` the above channel looks like:

```
    1.4.0 -- replaces -> 1.3.0 [deprecated]
```

Deprecated versions are upgradable but not installable. To achieve this, we will modify the operator-registry apis used by OLM to determine what can be installed.

#### Story 2

As an index maintainer I want to be able to undo the above operation ideally without removing the entire package and re-adding all the bundles.

##### Implementation Details

> The `opm index rm` command is modified to allow removal of the tail a channel (deprecated versions will always lie at the tail of the graph).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The `opm index rm` command is modified to allow removal of the tail of a channel (deprecated versions will always lie at the tail of the graph).
```

> The `opm index rm` command is modified to allow removal of the tail a channel (deprecated versions will always lie at the tail of the graph).

Reviewer 3: Can you go into more detail here? Right now we have no ux at all for "remove a specific bundle from a package" because `index rm` is scoped to a package. I thought that `index deprecate` does everything we actually need here. Why do we want this as well?

Author: This is to undo marking a version as deprecated and have a set of steps to revert what the deprecate command does. Now that I think about this a bit more, it could be enough to say "revert to the index image used in the deprecate command".

The `opm index add` command is modified to allow adding to the tail of a channel (removed versions from the deprecate command will always have been from the tail)

> With these two additions we can now undo the above deprecation by:

Reviewer 3: Why do we need to undo at all? If we're really in such a bad state that reverting to an old index isn't feasible and we need to do surgery on the index, don't we already have this by just index rm'ing the entire package and re-adding the set of bundles from scratch?

Author: yes that's just a painful UX but this is probably ok in the short term
